# Conservation of Electric Charge and the Process of Charging 

## explore conservation of electric charge for isolated systems. 

Operation of a Van de Graaf Generator (aka Mechanical Charge Pump)

for a negative sphere... 

rollers exist inside the top. Rollers move a rubber (insulating) belt

Belt gains electrons through friction 
if we add charges to the bottom through friction. 

wire "brush" at top allows electrons to leave the belt. 

electrons collect on surface of conducting sphere 

grounding involves electrically connecting a charged object to a much larger and aproximately neutral system (e.g. Earth)

attaching a system to ground allows charges to flow into or out of the ground to reach electrostatic equilibrium 

when the VDG is charged, the excess negative charges move into the ribbon. This causes the ribbon to repel from the sphere because like charges repel. However, when the grounded sphere makes contact, electrons on the sphere move out of the ribbon causing the ribbon to now be neutral and not repel. 

Why does the grounded sphere get attracted and then move away?

The sphere is first attracted to the negative VDG because the electrons in the grounded sphere move away into the ground due to induction. As a result, the grounded sphere has a net positive charge and is attracted to the negative VDG. However, once the grounded sphere gains a charge from the VDG, the VDG charge is decreased, and the small sphere is momentarily neutral causing it to move away due to gravity. This process repeats as the VDG is able to recharge.





