# Electric Fields

## define electric fields and predict the results of charge interactions 

mass creates gravitation field defined by direction other masses will move toward itself! 

closer to the mass -> stronger the field 

other masses feel forces in the same direction as the gravitational field. 

near surface field is constant g = 9.8N/kg 

# Electric fields 

Charge creates electric field defined by the direction a positive charge will move 

closer to the charge -> stronger field. 

$ E = \frac{F_E}{q}$

The electric field at a given point is the ratio of the electric force exerted on a test charge to the magnitude of the test charge. 

A test charge is a point charge of small enough magnitude such that its presence does not significantly affect an electric field in its vicinity.

Coulomb's Law with E-fields 

Coulomb's Law: $\mathbf{F}_E = \frac{1}{4\pi \epsilon_0} \frac{|q_1 q_2|}{r^2} $

Electric field: $\mathbf{E} = \frac{\mathbf{F}_E}{q}$

$\mathbf{E} = k\frac{|q|}{r^2}$

This derived equation is useful for determining the electric field for point charges or spherical geometry Only. 

electric field direction is defined by the direction a positive charge will move. 

Electric field magnitude is determined by $\mathbf{E} = \frac{\mathbf{F}_E}{q}$

for point charges or spherical symmetry, the electric field has an inverse square relationship with radius. $\mathbf{E} = k\frac{|q|}{r^2}$

## explore vector fields and symbollically solve for the resultant field at a given location 

Electric fields are vector quantities that can be represented by arrows. 

A vector field map is a grid where each point shows the magnitude and direction of a specified vector. 

Each point on a vector field map is the resultant vector from the superposition of all of the other vectors at that point. 


Electric field line diagrams are simplified models of electric field maps that can be used to determine the relative magnitude and direction of the electric field at any position in the diagram. 

# Conductors v Insulators
Conductors:

electrons easily move through the material (high electric permittivity)

when in electrostatic equilibrium excess charge resides on surface of the conductor 

insulators: 

Electrons more tightly bound to their molecular structure (low electric permittivity)

when in electrostatic equilibrium, excess charge is distributed through the entire material (including the surface)

## Electrostatic equilibrium 

Electrostatic equilibrium is reached when there is no more change in the distribution of charge. 

The net force on every charge is essentially zero.

$\sum \overrightarrow{F} = 0 = m\sout{\overrightarrow{a}}$

The excess charge of a solid conductor is distributed on the surface of the conductor. 

The electric field within the conductor is zero

## Insulators
uniform density $ \rho = \frac{q}{V}$

radial symmetry $ \rho = \_\_r^{\_\_}$

Insulators and conductors behave differently 

The electric field inside of any conductor in electrostatic equilibrium is zero 

The excess charges on any conductor in electrostatic equilibrium exist on the surface of the conductor 

The electric field inside of an insulator may have a non-zero value. 





