# Gauss's Law

### define Gauss's law for electrostatics to lay the groundwork for application

Gauss's law relates electric flux through a `Gaussian surface` to the charge enclosed by that surface. 

$\phi_E = \frac{q_{enclosed}}{\epsilon_0}$

$\oint \vec{E} \cdot d\vec{A} = \left( \frac{q_{enclosed}}{\epsilon_O} \right) $

A `Gaussian surface` is a three-dimensional, closed surface. 

In AP Physics: Electricity & Magnetism, quantitative application of Gauss's law is limited to charge distributions that are spherically, cylindrically, or planarly symmetric. 

### The "Big Three" Gaussian Surfaces 

Gaussian surfaces are typically constructed such that the electric field generated by the enclosed charge is either perpendicular or parallel to different regions of the Gaussian surface, resulting in a simplified surface integral. 

Gaussian Sphere: 

Positive Point charge

Entire surface has E-filed perpendicular to surface

Gaussian Cylinder: 

Negative line of charge

only clinder walls have electric flux. Flux on endcaps is zero because E-filed is parallel to surface. 

Gaussian Pillbox: 

Positive sheet of charge 

only endcaps have electric flux. Flux on side walls is zero because E-field is parallel to the surface. 

Gaussian sphere: 

$\oint \vec{E} \cdot d\vec{A} = |\vec{E}|4\pi r^2$

Gaussian cylinder:

$\oint \vec{E} \cdot d\vec{A} = |\vec{E}|2\pi rl$

## Charge Densities 

### Linear Density: 

Lambda: $\lambda = \frac{q}{L}$

$Q_{total} = \int \lambda(r)dr$

### Area (Surface) Density: 

Sigma $\sigma = \frac{q}{A}$

$Q_{total} = \int \sigma(r)dA$

### Volume Density: 

Rho: $\rho = \frac{q}{V}$

$Q_{total} = \int \rho(r)dV$

### Planes of charge

E-field for small plane of positive charge

there are edge effects but we consider them negligible

### Conducting plate 

A large thin conducting plate has a surface charge density of $23nC/m^2$

What is the electric field in the conductor?

zero!

### Conducting vs. Insulating plates

Conductors: 

- Electric field = zero inside material 
- When charge is added to a conductor it creates a charge density on both sides: 

"Two surfaces"

Insulators: 

- Electric field = non-zero value inside material 
- When charge is added to an insulator, it creates a charge density on one side only 

For a uniform electric field the E-field is a constant no matter the distance from the surface 

The only factor affecting the electric field is the surface charge density and indirectly, the material.

"Conductors"

$E = \frac{\sigma}{\epsilon_0}$

"Insulators"

$E = \frac{\sigma}{2\epsilon_0}$

### Insulating plate with uniform charge density 

A large 2cm thick insulating plate has a uniform volumetric charge density of $23nC/m^3$. What is the electric field at the center of the plate, 0.7cm from the center, and 6cm fron the center?

Takeaways 

Densities: 

$\lambda = \frac{q}{L} , \sigma = \frac{q}{A} , \rho = \frac{q}{V}$

Planar surfaces use a Gaussian pillbox where the flux only occurs through the endcaps, and not the sides. 

### Conducting Cylinder - Interior
A long conducting cylinder of radius R has a constant surface charge density, $-\sigma$ 

What is the magnitude of the electric field for `r < R` and `r > R`

E-field r < R: Zero! 

All charge resides on exterior surface of conductors in electrostatic equilibrium

A wire has linear charge density, $\lambda$, surrounded by a neutral conducting shell of inner radius R, and outer Radius 2R. Sketch the E-field as a function of radius. 

$E(2\pi rL) = \frac{\lambda L}{\epsilon_0}$

$E = \frac{\lambda}{2\pi\epsilon_0r}$

when r is half double the charge 

from R to 2R the E-field is zero since it is a conducting shell. 

takeaways: 

Electric field inside of conductor in electrostatic equilibrium is zero! 

$$ \oint{\vec{E} \cdot d\vec{A} = \frac{q_{enclosed}}{\epsilon_0}}$$

Close to conducting surface can be treated as a plane surface!

The left side is easy due to symmetry 

$$q_{enclosed} = \int{p(r)dV}$$

The Right side = Tricky due to ned to integrate 

- While you could memorize the general form for dV and cylinders you are better off understanding how the dV term can be broken down conceptually. 

### Apply Gauss's law to spherically symmetric examples 

### Gauss's Law Review

1. Gauss's law relates electric flux through a Gaussian surface to the charge enclosed by that surface. 

2. A Gaussian surface is a three-dimensional, closed surface. 

3. The total electric flux through a Gaussian surface is independent of the size of the Gaussian surface as long as the amount of enclosed charge remains constant. 

4. Gaussian surfaces are typically constructed such that the electric field generated by the enclosed charge is either perpendicular or parallel to different regions of the Gaussian surface, resulting in a simplified surface integral.

### Insulating sphere with variable charge density 

An insulatign sphere of radius R has a radially symmetric charge density of $\rho(r) = \frac{\alpha}{r}$

What is the electric field for r < R and r > R

$q_{enclosed} = \int{\rho(r)dV}$

$\rho(r) = \frac{\alpha}{r}$

$dV = Adr$

$A = 4\pi r^2$

$\oint{\vec{E} \cdot d\vec{A}} = |\vec{E}||\vec{A}| = E(4\pi r^2)$

$E(4\pi r^2) =\frac{ q_{enclosed}}{\epsilon_0}$

$q_{enclosed} = \int{\frac{\alpha}{r}4\pi r^2dr}$

$q_{enclosed} = 4\pi \alpha\int_0^r{rdr}$

$q_{enclosed} = 4\pi \alpha \frac{r^2}{2}|_0^r$

$q_{enclosed} = \frac{4 \pi \alpha r^2}{2}$

$E(4\pi r^2) =\frac{4 \pi \alpha r^2}{2\epsilon_0}$

$E = \frac{\alpha}{2\epsilon_0}$

### Conducting sphere with insulating shell 

A conductin sphere with a total charge of +Q and radius a, is surrounded by an insulating shell with a uniform charge density $\rho$. The inner radius is 2a and the outer radius is 3a as shown equating to a total charge of -2Q. 

Sketch the electric field as a function of radius for the entire shape. 


