# Unit 9 Electric Potential 

## 9.2.1 Explore relationship between electric potential and electric potential energy 

Electric potential (V) describes the electric potential energy $(U_E)$ per unit charge (q) at a point in space 

$$U_E = qV$$ 

$$V = \frac{U_E}{q} = \frac{kq}{r}$$

Similar to electric potential energy, electric potential is a scalar quantity, so you need to account for negative charges as negative when calculating total electric potential: 

$$V = k\sum_i\frac{q_i}{r_i}$$

## 9.2.3 Explore relationships between graphs of electric field and electric potential. 

Remember how E and V are related 

$E_x = -\frac{dV}{dx}$

$\Delta V = -\int{\vec{E} \cdot d\vec{r}}$

The electric field $E_x$ is the negative derivative of electric potential with respect to position

electric potential is the negative integral of the electric field with respect to that position. 

a derivative is like a slope of a line, and an integral is like the area under a graph. So E and V are similar to velocity and displacement. 

- electric field is the velocity of electric potential 
- Electric potential is the integral (area under the graph of Electric field)

Sketch the electric field graph from this electric potential graph. 

## 9.2.4 explore how point charge configurations can yield zero potential energy and/or zero electric field

### Electric Field (E) and Electric Potential (V)

Think about a group of four point charges on the x- and y-axes that are all equidistant from the origin (Points A, B, C, D)

What would each point charge need to be (+ or -) to have E = 0 at the origin? 

### Takeaways: 

Electric field is a vector quantity, so direction matters. 
- The total electric field at a point is the vector sum of the electric fields 

Electric potential is a scalar quantity, so direction does not matter
- Negative charges have negative potentials and positive charges have positive potentials. The total V at a point is the scalar sum of the potentials. 

Because of the relationships between E and V, we can have a location where E=0, but V does not have to be zero. This also means that if V = 0, then E = 0

## 9.2.5 explore the relationship between equipotential lines and electric field vectors 

### Equipotential lines 

**Equipotential lines** are lines of equal potential (think of elevation lines on a contour map or isobars-lines of equal pressure on a weather map).

when the lines are close together, the potential is changing quickly in a small space (think steep hill), so the electric field will be large. 

electric field lines are drawn perpendicular to the equipotential lines and will move in the direction of high potential to low potential

A > B = D > C

B > E > A = D > C

Calculate the electric field midway between points D and E. 

$|E| = \frac{\Delta V}{\Delta x}$ 

### Takeaways 

- Equipotential lines are lines of equal potential
- The closer together the lines, the bigger the electric field in that region 
- Electric fields run perpendicular to the equipotential lines from higher to lower potential


