# 9.3 Conservation of Electric Energy 

calculate the change in kinetic energy and final speed of charged particles after they move through a certain voltage difference. 

For a closed isolated system, **if** there are no nonconservative forces doing work on an object, then the total mechanical energy of the system is constant. Another way of saying this is that the total change in potential energy of the system is the opposite of the total change in kinetic energy of the objects in the system. 

$E_{mech} = U + K$

$\Delta E_{mech} = 0$

$\Delta U + \Delta K = 0$

$\Delta U = -\Delta K$

### Potential Difference and Electric Potential Energy

The potential difference, $\Delta V$, between two points is related to the change in electric potential energy of the charge-field system for a charged particle moving between the two points: 

$\Delta V = \frac{\Delta U_E}{q}$ 

### Proton moving through potential difference

A proton ($ q = 1.6*10^{-19} C$, $m_p = 1.67*10^{-27}kg$) moving with an initial speed of $v_i = 2*10^5 \space m/s$ enters a region of space where charged particles have created a potential difference. What is the proton's final speed, $v_f$, afte rit has moved through a potential difference of $\Delta V = +200 V$?

### Comparison of motion of proton and electron 

Both charges moved from lower to higher electric potential. The electric field points in the direction of decreasing potential, so both charges were moving opposite the direction that the electric field pointed. 

Proton: Force acts against the motion so the proton slows down. 

Electron: Force acts in same direction as motion so electron speeds up. 

### Takeaways: 

Potential difference, $\Delta V$, can be used to calculate the change in potential energy of the charge-field system for a charged particle moving in an electric field: 

$\Delta V = \frac{\Delta U_E}{q}$

Change in potential energy of the charge-field system can be used to calculate change in kinetic energy of the particle moving in the system

$\Delta U = -\Delta K$

Change in Kinetic energy can be used to calculate the final speed of a charged particle: 

$\Delta K = \frac{1}{2}mv_f^2 - \frac{1}{2}mv_i^2$

## 9.3.2 calculate the speed of a charged particle as it moves far away from a group of point charges. 

### Electric potential due to point charges 

To calculat the electric potential created by a group of point charges, the electric potential created by each individual point charge is calculated. 

The total electric potential is the sum of the individual values: 

$$V = k\sum_i{\frac{q_i}{r_i}}$$

## 9.3.3 analyze data relating the speed of a particle to the potential difference it moved through and use a graph to calculate the magnitude of the charge

$$\Delta U_E = q\Delta V$$
$$\Delta K = \frac{1}{2}mv_f^2 - \frac{1}{2}mv_i^2 = -\Delta U_E = -q\Delta V$$

Takeaways: 
Potential difference can be used to calculate the change in potential energy of the charge-field system for a charged particle moving in an electric field. 
$$\Delta V = \frac{\Delta U_E}{q}$$

Change in potential energy of closed, isolated charge-field system can be used to calculate change in kinetic energy of the particl emoving in the system. 

$$\Delta U = - \Delta K$$

Change in kinetic energy can be used to calculate the final speed of a charged particle: 

Look at the equation describing relationship between measured quantities to see how it can be rearranged to be in form of $y = mx + b$

Graph the quantities, and calculate the slope of best-fit line

The slope of the best fit line can be used to calculate an unknown quantity that appears in the relationship. 

## 9.3.4 look at a charged particle launched toward a charged sphere. 

We'll also calculate how close to the sphere the particle gets and what speed it would need to reach the edge of the sphere. 

### Potential due to uniformly charged sphere. 

Outside of a uniformly charged sphere, the equation for the electric potential due to the sphere is the same as that of a point charge at the spheres center. 

$$V = \frac{kq}{r}$$

